# Node.js

Node.js, commonly referred to as "Node," is an open-source, cross-platform JavaScript runtime environment that allows developers to run JavaScript code outside of a web browser.\
It is built on the V8 JavaScript runtime engine, which is the same engine that powers the Google Chrome browser. Node.js enables the execution of server-side JavaScript, making it possible to create web applications and server-side services using JavaScript.

## Key Features of Node.js

- **Asynchronous and Event-Driven:** Node.js is designed to handle asynchronous operations efficiently. It uses an event-driven, non-blocking I/O model, allowing developers to write scalable and high-performance applications.

- **Single-threaded, Non-blocking:** Node.js operates on a single-threaded event loop, handling multiple connections concurrently without creating new threads for each request. This makes it suitable for handling a large number of simultaneous connections.

- **Vast Ecosystem (npm):** Node.js has a rich ecosystem of libraries and packages, primarily managed by the Node Package Manager (npm). Developers can easily install and manage dependencies, facilitating rapid development.

- **Cross-Platform:** Node.js is designed to work seamlessly on various operating systems, including Linux, macOS, and Windows.

- **Community Support:** Node.js has a large and active community, contributing to its growth and providing support through forums, documentation, and numerous third-party libraries.

## Installing Node.js
Linux:

You can install Node.js on Linux using the package manager. For example, on Ubuntu:
```sh
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install nodejs
sudo apt-get install npm
```

macOS:
You can install Node.js on macOS using Homebrew:
```sh
brew install node
```

Windows:
Download the installer from the official Node.js website.
Run the installer and follow the installation instructions.

Along with node installation, the installation proces will also instal a default package manager which is Node Package Manager (npm).
npm is used to manage and share packages (libraries or modules) of JavaScript code

## Verifying Installation
To verify the installation, open a terminal or command prompt and run the following commands:

```sh
node -v
npm -v
```


## Creating a Node.js Project
Ypu should first navigate to the folder where you want to initialize your project and then run the following command in the terminal:
```sh
npm init
```
This command initiates an interactive setup process.\
It prompts you with a series of questions regarding your project (e.g., package name, version, entry point, test command, git repository, keywords, author, license, etc.) and you need to provide answers to these questions or press Enter to accept the default values.\
Once you've answered all the questions, it generates a package.json file based on your responses.

```sh
npm init -y
```
This command performs a non-interactive setup.\
It automatically accepts default values for all the questions asked during the initialization process, assuming you want to use the default values for everything.This is useful when you want to quickly create a package.json file without going through the interactive prompts.\
It automatically generates a package.json file with default values.

The **package.json** file is a metadata file for a Node.js project. It contains information about the project, its dependencies, the versions of the dependencies, and configuration details. 

The **package-lock.json** file is automatically generated by npm when it installs a project's dependencies and it shouldn't be edited manually.

The **node_modules** folder is a directory created by Node.js to store locally installed dependencies (third-party libraries or modules) for a specific Node.js project.